
Raymond replied that this, too, was due to mere chance. 

To which the  retorted that in this case "chance" or "mere coincidence" 
seemed to play a remarkably large part. Was it by chance that I hadn't intervened 
when Raymond assaulted his mistress? Did this convenient term "chance" account 
for my having vouched for Raymond at the police station and having made, on that 
occasion, statements extravagantly favorable to him? In conclusion he asked 
Raymond to state what were his means of livelihood. 



59 



Albert Camus ♦ THE STRANGER 

On his describing himself as a warehouseman, the Prosecutor informed the jury it 
was common knowledge that the witness lived on the immoral earnings of women. I, 
he said, was this man's intimate friend and associate; in fact, the whole background 
of the crime was of the most squalid description. And what made it even more odious 
was the personality of the prisoner, an inhuman monster wholly without a moral 
sense. 

Raymond began to expostulate, and my lawyer, too, protested. They were told that 
the Prosecutor must be allowed to finish his remarks. 

"I have nearly done," he said; then turned to Raymond. "Was the prisoner your 
friend?" 

"Certainly. We were the best of pals, as they say." 

The Prosecutor then put me the same question. I looked hard at Raymond, and he 
did not turn away. 

Then, "Yes," I answered. 

The Prosecutor turned toward the jury. 

"Not only did the man before you in the dock indulge in the most shameful orgies 
on the day following his mother's death. He killed a man cold-bloodedly, in 
pursuance of some sordid vendetta in the underworld of prostitutes and pimps. That, 
gentlemen of the jury, is the type of man the prisoner is." 

No sooner had he sat down than my lawyer, out of all patience, raised his arms so 
high that his sleeves fell back, showing the full length of his starched shirt cuffs. 

"Is my client on trial for having buried his mother, or for killing a man?" he asked. 

There were some titters in court. But then the Prosecutor sprang to his feet and, 
draping his gown round him, said he was amazed at his friend's ingenuousness in 
failing to see that between these two elements of the case there was a vital link. They 
hung together psychologically, if he might put it so. "In short," he concluded, 
speaking with great vehemence, "I accuse the prisoner of behaving at his mother's 
funeral in a way that showed he was already a criminal at heart." 

These words seemed to take much effect on the jury and public. My lawyer merely 
shrugged his shoulders and wiped the sweat from his forehead. But obviously he was 
rattled, and I had a feeling things weren't going well for me. 

Soon after this incident the court rose. As I was being taken from the courthouse to 
the prison van, I was conscious for a few brief moments of the once familiar feel of a 
summer evening out-of-doors. And, sitting in the darkness of my moving cell, I 
recognized, echoing in my tired brain, all the characteristic sounds of a town I'd 
loved, and of a certain hour of the day which I had always particularly enjoyed. The 
shouts of newspaper boys in the already languid air, the last calls of birds in the 
public garden, the cries of sandwich vendors, the screech of streetcars at the steep 
corners of the upper town, and that faint rustling overhead as darkness sifted down 



60 



Albert Camus ♦ THE STRANGER 

upon the harbor — all these sounds made my return to prison like a blind man's 
journey along a route whose every inch he knows by heart. 

Yes, this was the evening hour when — how long ago it seemed! — I always felt so 
well content with life. Then, what awaited me was a night of easy, dreamless sleep. 
This was the same hour, but with a difference; I was returning to a cell, and what 
awaited me was a night haunted by forebodings of the coming day. And so I learned 
that familiar paths traced in the dusk of summer evenings may lead as well to prisons 
as to innocent, untroubled sleep. 



61 



Albert Camus ♦ THE STRANGER 



IV 



IT is always interesting, even in the prisoner's dock, to hear oneself being talked 
about. And certainly in the speeches of my lawyer and the prosecuting counsel a 
great deal was said about me; more, in fact, about me personally than about my 
crime. 

Really there wasn't any very great difference between the two speeches. Counsel 
for the defense raised his arms to heaven and pleaded guilty, but with extenuating 
circumstances. The Prosecutor made similar gestures; he agreed that I was guilty, but 
denied extenuating circumstances. 

One thing about this phase of the trial was rather irksome. Quite often, interested 
as I was in what they had to say, I was tempted to put in a word, myself. But my 
lawyer had advised me not to. "You won't do your case any good by talking," he had 
warned me. In fact, there seemed to be a conspiracy to exclude me from the 
proceedings; I wasn't to have any say and my fate was to be decided out of hand. 

It was quite an effort at times for me to refrain from cutting them all short, and 
saying: "But, damn it all, who's on trial in this court, I'd like to know? It's a serious 
matter for a man, being accused of murder. And I've something really important to 
tell you." 

However, on second thoughts, I found I had nothing to say. In any case, I must 
admit that hearing oneself talked about loses its interest very soon. The Prosecutor's 
speech, especially, began to bore me before he was halfway through it. The only 
things that really caught my attention were occasional phrases, his gestures, and 
some elaborate tirades — but these were isolated patches. 

What he was aiming at, I gathered, was to show that my crime was premeditated. I 
remember his saying at one moment, "I can prove this, gentlemen of the jury, to the 
hilt. First, you have the facts of the crime; which are as clear as daylight. And then 
you have what I may call the night side of this case, the dark workings of a criminal 
mentality." 

He began by summing up the facts, from my mother's death onward. He stressed 
my heartlessness, my inability to state Mother's age, my visit to the swimming pool 
where I met Marie, our matinee at the pictures where a Fernandel film was showing, 
and finally my return with Marie to my rooms. I didn't quite follow his remarks at 
first, as he kept on mentioning "the prisoner's mistress," whereas for me she was just 
"Marie." Then he came to the subject of Raymond. It seemed to me that his way of 
treating the facts showed a certain shrewdness. All he said sounded quite plausible. 
I'd written the letter in collusion with Raymond so as to entice his mistress to his 
room and subject her to ill-treatment by a man "of more than dubious reputation." 
Then, on the beach, I'd provoked a brawl with Raymond's enemies, in the course of 

62 



Albert Camus ♦ THE STRANGER 

which Raymond was wounded. I'd asked him for his revolver and gone back by 
myself with the intention of using it. Then I'd shot the Arab. After the first shot I 
waited. Then, "to be certain of making a good job of it," I fired four more shots 
deliberately, point-blank, and in cold blood, at my victim. 

"That is my case," he said. "I have described to you the series of events which led 
this man to kill the deceased, fully aware of what he was doing. I emphasize this 
point. We are not concerned with an act of homicide committed on a sudden impulse 
which might serve as extenuation. I ask you to note, gentlemen of the jury, that the 
prisoner is an educated man. You will have observed the way in which he answered 
my questions; he is intelligent and he knows the value of words. And I repeat that it 
is quite impossible to assume that, when he committed the crime, he was unaware 
what he was doing." 

I noticed that he laid stress on my "intelligence." It puzzled me rather why what 
would count as a good point in an ordinary person should be used against an accused 
man as an overwhelming proof of his guilt. While thinking this over, I missed what 
he said next, until I heard him exclaim indignantly: "And has he uttered a word of 
regret for his most odious crime? Not one word, gentlemen. Not once in the course of 
these proceedings did this man show the least contrition." 

Turning toward the dock, he pointed a finger at me, and went on in the same 
strain. I really couldn't understand why he harped on this point so much. Of course, I 
had to own that he was right; I didn't feel much regret for what I'd done. Still, to my 
mind he overdid it, and I'd have liked to have a chance of explaining to him, in a 
quite friendly, almost affectionate way, that I have never been able really to regret 
anything in all my life. I've always been far too much absorbed in the present 
moment, or the immediate future, to think back. Of course, in the position into which 
I had been forced, there was no question of my speaking to anyone in that tone. I 
hadn't the right to show any friendly feeling or possess good intentions. And I tried 
to follow what came next, as the Prosecutor was now considering what he called my 
"soul." 

He said he'd studied it closely — and had found a blank, "literally nothing, 
gentlemen of the jury." Really, he said, I had no soul, there was nothing human about 
me, not one of those moral qualities which normal men possess had any place in my 
mentality. "No doubt," he added, "we should not reproach him with this. We cannot 
blame a man for lacking what it was never in his power to acquire. But in a criminal 
court the wholly passive ideal of tolerance must give place to a sterner, loftier ideal, 
that of justice. Especially when this lack of every decent instinct is such as that of the 
man before you, a menace to society." He proceeded to discuss my conduct toward 
my mother, repeating what he had said in the course of the hearing. But he spoke at 
much greater length of my crime — at such length, indeed, that I lost the thread and 
was conscious only of the steadily increasing heat. 



63 



Albert Camus ♦ THE STRANGER 

A moment came when the Prosecutor paused and, after a short silence, said in a 
low, vibrant voice: "This same court, gentlemen, will be called on to try tomorrow 
that most odious of crimes, the murder of a father by his son." To his mind, such a 
crime was almost unimaginable. But, he ventured to hope, justice would be meted 
out without paltering. And yet, he made bold to say, the horror that even the crime of 
parricide inspired in him paled beside the loathing inspired by my callousness. 

"This man, who is morally guilty of his mother's death, is no less unfit to have a 
place in the community than that other man who did to death the father that begat 
him. And, indeed, the one crime led on to the other; the first of these two criminals, 
the man in the dock, set a precedent, if I may put it so, and authorized the second 
crime. Yes, gentlemen, I am convinced" — here he raised his voice a tone — "that you 
will not find I am exaggerating the case against the prisoner when I say that he is also 
guilty of the murder to be tried tomorrow in this court. And I look to you for a 
verdict accordingly." 

The Prosecutor paused again, to wipe the sweat off his face. He then explained 
that his duty was a painful one, but he would do it without flinching. "This man has, 
I repeat, no place in a community whose basic principles he flouts without 
compunction. Nor, heartless as he is, has he any claim to mercy. I ask you to impose 
the extreme penalty of the law; and I ask it without a qualm. In the course of a long 
career, in which it has often been my duty to ask for a capital sentence, never have I 
felt that painful duty weigh so little on my mind as in the present case. In demanding 
a verdict of murder without extenuating circumstances, I am following not only the 
dictates of my conscience and a sacred obligation, but also those of the natural and 
righteous indignation I feel at the sight of a criminal devoid of the least spark of 
human feeling." 

When the Prosecutor sat down there was a longish silence. Personally I was quite 
overcome by the heat and my amazement at what I had been hearing. The presiding 
judge gave a short cough, and asked me in a very low tone if I had anything to say. I 
rose, and as I felt in the mood to speak, I said the first thing that crossed my mind: 
that I'd had no intention of killing the Arab. The Judge replied that this statement 
would be taken into consideration by the court. Meanwhile he would be glad to hear, 
before my counsel addressed the court, what were the motives of my crime. So far, 
he must admit, he hadn't fully understood the grounds of my defense. 

I tried to explain that it was because of the sun, but I spoke too quickly and ran my 
words into each other. I was only too conscious that it sounded nonsensical, and, in 
fact, I heard people tittering. 

My lawyer shrugged his shoulders. Then he was directed to address the court, in 
his turn. But all he did was to point out the lateness of the hour and to ask for an 
adjournment till the following afternoon. To this the judge agreed. 



64 



Albert Camus ♦ THE STRANGER 

When I was brought back next day, the electric fans were still churning up the 
heavy air and the jurymen plying their gaudy little fans in a sort of steady rhythm. 
The speech for the defense seemed to me interminable. At one moment, however, I 
pricked up my ears; it was when I heard him saying: "It is true I killed a man." He 
went on in the same strain, saying "I" when he referred to me. It seemed so queer 
that I bent toward the policeman on my right and asked him to explain. He told me to 
shut up; then, after a moment, whispered: "They all do that." It seemed to me that the 
idea behind it was still further to exclude me from the case, to put me off the map. so 
to speak, by substituting the lawyer for myself. Anyway, it hardly mattered; I already 
felt worlds away from this courtroom and its tedious "proceedings." 

My lawyer, in any case, struck me as feeble to the point of being ridiculous. He 
hurried through his plea of provocation, and then he, too, started in about my soul. 
But I had an impression that he had much less talent than the Prosecutor. 

"I, too," he said, "have closely studied this man's soul; but, unlike my learned 
friend for the prosecution, I have found something there. Indeed, I may say that I 
have read the prisoner's mind like an open book." What he had read there was that I 
was an excellent young fellow, a steady, conscientious worker who did his best by 
his employer; that I was popular with everyone and sympathetic in others' troubles. 
According to him I was a dutiful son, who had supported his mother as long as he 
was able. After anxious consideration I had reached the conclusion that, by entering a 
home, the old lady would have comforts that my means didn't permit me to provide 
for her. "I am astounded, gentlemen," he added, "by the attitude taken up by my 
learned friend in referring to this Home. Surely if proof be needed of the excellence 
of such institutions, we need only remember that they are promoted and financed by 
a government department." I noticed that he made no reference to the funeral, and 
this seemed to me a serious omission. But, what with his long-windedness, the 
endless days and hours they had been discussing my "soul," and the rest of it, I found 
that my mind had gone blurred; everything was dissolving into a grayish, watery 
haze. 

Only one incident stands out; toward the end, while my counsel rambled on, I 
heard the tin trumpet of an ice-cream vendor in the street, a small, shrill sound 
cutting across the flow of words. And then a rush of memories went through my 
mind — memories of a life which was mine no longer and had once provided me with 
the surest, humblest pleasures: warm smells of summer, my favorite streets, the sky 
at evening, Marie's dresses and her laugh. The futility of what was happening here 
seemed to take me by the throat, I felt like vomiting, and I had only one idea: to get it 
over, to go back to my cell, and sleep ... and sleep. 

Dimly I heard my counsel making his last appeal. 

"Gentlemen of the jury, surely you will not send to his death a decent, hard- 
working young man, because for one tragic moment he lost his self-control? Is he not 



65 



Albert Camus ♦ THE STRANGER 

sufficiently punished by the lifelong remorse that is to be his lot? I confidently await 
your verdict, the only verdict possible — that of homicide with extenuating 
circumstances." 

The court rose, and the lawyer sat down, looking thoroughly exhausted. Some of 
his colleagues came to him and shook his hand. "You put up a magnificent show, old 
man," I heard one of them say. Another lawyer even called me to witness: "Fine, 
wasn't it?" I agreed, but insincerely; I was far too tired to judge if it had been "fine" 
or otherwise. 

Meanwhile the day was ending and the heat becoming less intense. By some vague 
sounds that reached me from the street I knew that the cool of the evening had set in. 
We all sat on, waiting. And what we all were waiting for really concerned nobody 
but me. I looked round the courtroom. It was exactly as it had been on the first day. I 
met the eyes of the journalist in gray and the robot woman. This reminded me that 
not once during the whole hearing had I tried to catch Marie's eye. It wasn't that I'd 
forgotten her; only I was too preoccupied. I saw her now, seated between Celeste and 
Raymond. She gave me a little wave of her hand, as if to say, "At last!" She was 
smiling, but I could tell that she was rather anxious. But my heart seemed turned to 
stone, and I couldn't even return her smile. 
